[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Thinking Allowed
conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today we're going to explore
the mystery of consciousness.
My guest is Peter
Russell, a fellow
of the Institute of Noetic
Sciences in Sausalito,
California.
Peter has written numerous
books, including the TM book,
"The Brain Book," a
translation of the Upanishads,
"Waking Up in Time," "The
Global Brain," and "From Science
to God."
Welcome, Peter.
>> Thank you.
Lovely to be with you today.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you.
We seem to be living
in a culture that
has some very schizophrenic
ideas about consciousness.
Mainstream science
today is just,
I think, starting to accept
the notion that consciousness
is something they ought
to begin to deal with.
>> Yes, I think consciousness
is the great problem
for the scientific culture.
It's fascinating.
It's the one thing
we cannot deny.
Each and every one of
us is a conscious being.
We have inner
experiences all the time.
Every scientist is
a conscious being.
The one thing that science
cannot explain is how
consciousness arises.
And you're right.
At the moment, there's
a lot of people
beginning to look at that.
But I think they're
probably on the wrong track.
They're beginning to look
at how it might arise out
of physics, out of quantum
theory, these sorts of things.
>> Well, for
virtually a century,
it seemed as if science simply
tried to deny that there was
even a problem there at all.
>> Yes.
I think this always
happens with problems.
It's what Thomas
Kuhn showed when he
talked about paradigm shifts.
And what happens
at the beginning
is science ignores the problem.
And they did that
for a long time.
We don't have to worry
about consciousness.
Partly modern science seems
to understand the functioning
of the material world perfectly
well without any need to go
into consciousness, until
it comes to the fact that we
cannot explain at all
why we have awareness.
It's actually easier
to explain the Big Bang
and how elements evolved
into atoms and atoms evolved
into molecules, which
became simple systems, which
evolved into human
beings like ourselves.
That is easier to understand
than why any one of us
ever has a single thought.
>> Well, it strikes me, Peter,
that the problem runs even
deeper.
Because many cultures in
other historical periods
didn't have this problem
with consciousness.
It's unique, I think,
to Western culture,
and particularly in the
19th and 20th centuries.
It strikes me that the
20th century certainly
was the bloodiest century in
human history, a dark century--
two world wars,
many massive periods
of starvation, social
alienation, and revolution.
And I tend to think that
that sort of social darkness
is not unrelated to
the fact that we lived
during that century in an
era in which consciousness
itself wasn't even recognized
by the major social institution
of inquiry, being science.
>> Yes.
Science just didn't want
to look at it at all.
But I think now it
is being forced to,
and I think several
things are forcing it.
One, there's things in physics
like in quantum physics
and relativity
where consciousness
seems to play a part
in what we observe.
And now in terms of our
brain, understanding
of the brain, which is probably
one of the fastest growing
areas of science,
we're coming up
against the question
of consciousness.
We can understand so much
now about the human brain.
There's still a lot more to go.
But that raises the question
of what is consciousness?
And how does
consciousness emerge?
>> Well, philosophers such as
David Chalmers talk about it
as the hard problem, that you
can't get from here to there.
From a materialistic worldview,
you simply cannot arrive at any
sort of mechanism which is
required by materialism that
will lead you to consciousness.
>> Exactly.
The two are totally
different types.
The material world, we assume,
is unconscious and material.
Consciousness is
immaterial and conscious.
So how does something as
immaterial as consciousness
ever arise from something
as unconscious as matter?
That's the hard problem.
But I think it's, in a
way, the question is wrong.
We are assuming that the
real world is the material
world of spacetime and matter.
And that's the problem, I
think, that modern science
has got stuck in
this worldview that
says that is the real world.
And then we are posed with
the question, well then,
how does consciousness
arise from it?
I don't think it does.
My view is consciousness is--
>> If we let go of that
metaphysical assumption made
by materialistic science, the
problem of consciousness no
longer seems like
such a problem.
It becomes a first
cause, a principle.
>> Yes, yes, which is what
a lot of the great spiritual
traditions and philosophers
have said all along,
is that consciousness is,
and it's a primary quality
of the universe.
>> On the other
hand, in science,
there is an effort to describe
how consciousness would evolve
from neurobiology, how computer
models might have something
to do with consciousness.
After all, memory seems to be
a property of computer systems.
Perception is a
property of neurons.
>> Well, I'm not so sure it is.
>> Well, let me say sensation.
>> They are clearly involved
in mediating the process.
And I think it comes back
to saying that if we believe
the material world is
real, then we think
that they are the cause of it.
But I think they're
part of the mediation.
I don't think they
actually create experience.
I don't think neurons
create consciousness.
They may be amplifiers
of what is going on,
and they may help create the
details of our experience.
But I don't think they
create experience itself.
>> Well, David Chalmers
sometimes talks about--
he's a professor,
studies consciousness.
We've interviewed him, the
University of California Santa
Cruz.
He suggests there are the easy
problems and the hard problems.
>> Right.
>> The easy problems might
be, how is it that when I see,
I see you and not just a bunch
of patches of light and forum,
that there is a
coherence to my vision?
That's a problem,
perhaps, for neurology.
>> Yes.
And these are all
the easy problems.
How does memory work?
How does perception work?
How do we control the body?
How do thoughts arise?
The easy problems are
to do with understanding
the neurophysiology.
They're called easy,
but they're probably
the most difficult
problems we've faced.
>> Yes.
>> But the point is, ultimately
we may be able to understand
those easy problems.
We may be able to understand
how the brain analyzes
a visual scene in front of
us and reconstitutes that
into a picture.
But the hard problem is even
when we understand all of that,
why should any of that
processing in the brain ever
give rise to a
subjective experience?
Why does it all
go on in the dark?
That's the hard problem.
And to me, that's pointing
towards something fundamentally
wrong with the current
scientific worldview.
And yet scientists
don't see that.
They keep on trying
to explain that
within the current
scientific worldview.
So some people like
Hameroff believe
it's to do with
tiny microtubules
in the brain cells, which you
can get coherent functions
happening there, laser
like effects with water
molecules, which
he suggests maybe
is the source of consciousness.
But you're still faced
with the hard problem,
how does a quantum process
give rise to something
as subjective as
our own experience?
And the greatest twist
in this whole paradox
is that in the end, all we
ever know is consciousness.
We don't actually know
the world of matter.
I mean, right now,
we're sitting here.
We're experiencing
the world around us.
This table seems very real.
But all I'm actually
knowing is the re-creation
in my consciousness, in
my mind, of this table
with its color
and its solidness,
and I'm hearing the
sound of your voice.
But all of that is a
creation in consciousness.
>> A simulation, so to speak.
>> Yes, it's all a
simulation of the world.
>> And the simulation
is obviously conditioned
by our apparatus.
>> Yeah.
But what I'm saying
is in the end,
the only thing we know
for certain is actually
consciousness.
The world of spacetime
and matter is secondary.
We know it through inference.
>> Well, that's a very
interesting point.
And it's quite contrary to the
basic axioms of empiricism,
which suggests that the
material world is primary
and consciousness is secondary.
>> Exactly, and that's the shift
that I think we have to reverse
that whole polarity.
>> William James developed what
he called radical empiricism,
in which he made that point.
>> Yes, he was stepping
in that direction,
that we need to really
trust our experience.
Because the fundamental
datum is experience.
And experience takes
place in consciousness.
>> I should mention for
the benefit of our viewers,
William James is considered the
founder of American psychology
and lived around a century ago.
But many great thinkers
have made the same point.
Sir Arthur Eddington
in physics--
>> Yep.
I think and many physicists.
For example, Schrodinger,
we have Schrodinger's wave
equation.
>> Erwin Schrodinger.
>> Yeah, one of the
great quantum physicists.
He was saying in the end,
the ultimate reality is mind.
And he came to that
conclusion as a physicist.
The ultimate reality is mind.
>> Well, it seems to me that
many people suggest since we
can't seem to even conceivably
derive consciousness from
physical systems, maybe
consciousness is primary.
>> Yes.
Well, that's what I'm
arguing for in my book.
If we make consciousness
primary, what is interesting,
it doesn't change a single
thing in modern science.
It doesn't change
any of physics.
any of mathematics.
It doesn't change biology.
All of that is exactly the same.
But what it does do is
offer some interesting new
interpretations of
some things which
are happening in quantum
physics and relativity
where consciousness
gets involved.
But it doesn't actually
change the mathematics at all.
What it does do is open us up
to a whole new understanding
of spirituality,
and I think what
all the great
teachers have been on
about for thousands of years.
And I think this is
probably why humanity,
the human race is creating
such havoc when you talk
about the bloody
wars and things,
is because we're living in
a spiritually arid time.
>> We don't know who we are.
>> We've lost touch with
our spiritual roots,
and religion is sort of put
right back on the back shelf.
Some people go to
church on Sundays.
Most don't even do that.
So spirituality has dropped
right out of our culture.
And that, to me, is what
is interesting about making
this shift in worldview,
is that it actually
allows spiritual wisdom
to come in and sit side
by side with the scientific
worldview without any conflict.
So it's expanding the
worldview so that both
can sit comfortably together.
>> Peter, we're going
to take a break.
We'll be back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Hello.
Welcome back to
"Thinking Allowed."
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
We're talking about the
mystery of consciousness.
My guest is Peter
Russell, author
of "From Science to God."
Peter, you described
previously the notion
that consciousness might just be
primary, even more fundamental
than space and time,
matter and energy.
Now, to give the
materialists their due,
their position generally is that
consciousness is not primary,
it's an emergent phenomenon.
It emerges from
material systems.
Some call it an epiphenomenon.
And they argue that
there are other emergent
phenomenon in nature.
Why shouldn't consciousness
be one of them?
>> Well, I think two reasons.
First of all, this
is only a belief.
There is no evidence
whatsoever that consciousness
is an emergent phenomenon.
But you have to
come to that belief
if you accept that spacetime
and matter are primary.
You are led to some sort
of philosophy like that.
And sorry, what's the other
question you asked me?
>> Well, to just
give them their due.
They point out that many
things are like life itself.
>> Yes, other things
emerge-- right,
but those other things that are
emergent are of the same type.
So when we talk about life, life
is of the same type as matter.
I mean, a living cell
is a material entity.
The laws which govern
the living cell
are an emergent phenomenon
that have emerged,
and they are something new.
And you can say the
same thing with society.
The laws that govern society
is an emergent phenomenon
that have come out of life.
But they're still laws
of the physical world.
Consciousness does not
belong to the physical world.
And so you cannot have something
which is of a totally different
type emerging from
the material type.
>> I want to be fair
to the materialists,
because I know that if there
were such a person in the room,
he would debate you vigorously--
>> He may well do.
>> --on this point--
>> And I would debate
him vigorously.
>> --for days.
>> Yes.
>> And I think that
needs to be pointed out.
A very, I think, very--
I want to say strong, but I
will say detailed arguments can
be made on behalf
of the position
that consciousness
might just be emergent.
>> Yes, but I think all those
arguments are founded upon
the assumption that the
spacetime matter world is real.
And I think that
is the assumption
we need to challenge.
I think it's very parallel to
what happened 500 years ago,
when everybody thought the Earth
was the center of the universe
and it was still.
And people like
Copernicus came along
and suggested the Earth moved.
And they said,
that is ridiculous.
There is no evidence
whatsoever the Earth is moving.
If it was, thing would
fly across the room.
The Earth is clearly still.
Don't be so ridiculous.
Because that was the belief
system everybody was stuck in.
And I think the same today.
We are all stuck in
this belief system
that spacetime and
matter are real.
And people can argue
very coherently
about that within
that assumption.
>> Now, when you
say we're all stuck,
what you really mean are people
who subscribe to scientific
materialism.
>> OK, yes.
>> That's actually,
I would estimate,
even in the Western world
maybe 25% of the populations.
>> Yes.
I don't know what the
actual percentage is, yes.
When I say we all, I should
rephrase that more accurately,
most scientists, the
majority of scientists.
>> Other people tend to
have a religious worldview
or a philosophical worldview
that is larger than just
scientific materialism.
>> Yes.
And yet scientific
materialism seems
to be the worldview by
which our culture operates,
which our political institutions
and legal institutes,
everything works
on that assumption.
Although, as you
say, a lot of people
don't actually agree
with that underneath.
>> No.
In fact, even our legal
system believes very firmly
in free will and
human choice, which
total scientific materialism
doesn't allow for.
>> Right.
Well, that's a
strange one when you
get scientists who choose
not to believe in free will.
>> So there are very venerable
structures in our society that
hold a view of consciousness
that's quite different from
the view of science.
In fact, most people think
it odd to believe that we
have no free will at all.
>> Right.
But that's why, you see,
I think consciousness
is going to be the
paradigm breaker
for the scientific worldview.
Because science, as you
say, is leaving it out,
leaving it out at the moment.
>> It's kind of surprising that
it ever got to this point where
scientists had become so
alienated from something
as basic as consciousness
and free will.
>> Well, in a way, that
probably goes back to Descartes.
Because what Descartes
did was he said,
let's divide the world up
into this res extensa--
that's Latin for meaning
things with extension in space.
>> Extension in space.
>> And there's res cogitans,
which is things in the mind.
And he said in order not
to alienate the Vatican,
because he'd already seen people
like Bruno burnt at the stake
for supporting
Copernicus and ideas that
went against the church.
He said, we'll leave things
to do with consciousness,
the mind, to the church.
And we'll let science
deal with things
that exist in space and
time, things with extension.
And so science went ahead
exploring-- if I simplify,
basically science
went ahead exploring
the world of
space-time and matter
and left consciousness aside.
And consciousness moved--
the philosophers started
exploring consciousness.
There became many
great philosophers
who looked into that, and
we have the whole tradition
of European philosophy,
a lot of which
was exploring consciousness.
And then it moved
into psychology.
And now today we're seeing that
whole trend, the exploration
of consciousness, coming to a
point where we're saying we now
have to go back and re-look
at our scientific worldview
and perhaps bring
them back together.
That split that
Descartes made, it's
now time to join the
two back together again,
and so bring the world
of matter together
with the world of spirit.
>> You write quite a bit
about the explorations
into consciousness of the
philosopher Immanuel Kant.
>> Yes.
Well, Immanuel Kant, I think,
is probably as important in this
as Copernicus was.
In fact, Kant himself,
without being arrogant,
he suggested his ideas were
going to trigger a Copernican
revolution in philosophy.
And it took Copernicus 150 years
before his ideas were proven.
And I think it's
the same with Kant.
It's only 200 years ago
that Kant was writing.
And what Kant said,
which I think is--
he said many things, but I
think the crucial thing here,
he said there are,
again, two worlds.
There is the world
we experience,
which is the phenomena that
arise in our experience.
And there is the world out
there, which gives rise to it.
So there is this table.
But he said all we ever
know of this table is
what we experience, is the forms
that arise in consciousness.
When I see there's
a blue color here,
he would say there's
no blue out there.
And he didn't even know
about modern physics.
The blue is purely
a quality which
arises in consciousness
in response
to a particular frequency
of vibration of light.
But there's no blue
in the physical world.
There's just a
frequency of vibration.
>> We could even argue from
the point of view of pure
physicality, there's
nothing solid here.
>> No, this is
99.9999999% empty space.
An atom is like a pea in the
middle of the football stadium
with other peas revolving
around the stands.
There's that much empty space.
But because of electromagnetic
forces and the way
atoms are bound together,
the empty space of my hand
will not pass through the
empty space of the table.
And so I have the
appearance of solidness.
And that's what solidness is,
is the fact that these things
won't permeate each other.
And so we think of them
as physically solid,
but they're not.
That's just part of the model
we create in our experience.
>> Which would be consistent
with Kant's philosophy.
>> Exactly.
Exactly.
And so Kant was
saying all we ever
know is what arises in
consciousness, which is really,
I think, what a lot of the
great old Eastern philosophers
are saying, that
all we ever know
is consciousness and the
arisings in consciousness.
And I think that's what
many yogis and great saints
have come to experience through
years and years of meditation,
of exploration of their
own consciousness.
They've come to
experience that everything
is an arising in the mind.
Everything they know is an
arising in consciousness.
And in that, I think there
is an incredible freedom.
That's what they talk about,
is that freedom from thinking,
that I am at the
mercy of the world,
as well as, I am continually
the author of my own experience.
>> In that sense, one might say
that all of our so-called hard
sciences-- physics,
chemistry, biology--
are descriptions of
our consciousness.
>> Exactly.
Well, what they are is they
are taking our consciousness
and then from that,
trying to arrive
at a description of
the external world.
And what we arrive
at is various models.
And models are just
ideas in consciousness.
And an electron is a model
that human consciousness
has invented to describe
certain experiences
and certain experiments.
No one's ever seen an electron.
And what we know
an electron, it's
nothing like we
think it might be.
It's certainly not
a solid particle.
It's just a model.
And you could say all
of science is an attempt
to take that data of
consciousness, that
arise in consciousness,
and from that form
maps of what that underlying
reality out there is actually
like.
>> Well, from the point of
view of Eastern mysticism,
consciousness is sort
of a pure empty field.
What we experience
within that field,
the objects of consciousness,
are conditioned certainly
by our biological system.
>> Yeah.
Well, consciousness--
there's pure consciousness,
which is consciousness
before it takes on form.
And an analogy I often
think of for that
is like if you've
got a film projector,
you've got white
light behind the film.
That is like the
pure light, which
is the same for every
single film projector.
That light shines through
the film onto the screen,
and it takes on the
colors of the film,
and you get a particular
image forming.
But you'd have to take the
film out completely just
to see the white light.
And I think it's the
same with consciousness.
The consciousness, my
consciousness right
now is taking on all these
forms I'm experiencing
of you and the studio and also
the thoughts and feelings that
are inside me.
It's taking on all these forms.
But if I were to stop
and become very quiet
and go into a deep
state of meditation
so that the mind becomes
still and I'm not experiencing
the world anymore, then you
can come back to a state
where you are just that
pure light of consciousness
before it takes on all
these multitudinous forms.
>> It's interesting, Peter, that
you mentioned the pure light
of consciousness.
When we come back for part
2 of this two-part series,
we'll talk about the
meaning of light itself
and the relationship
between consciousness
and physical light.
I know you have a lot to
say about that as well.
>> Yep.
I think they're very parallel.
And I think it's
no accident we use
the word light in both cases.
>> Well, Peter Russell, it's
been a pleasure having this
discussion with you on the
mystery of consciousness.
It's a deep problem, and
it's very heartening to me
that people such as yourself
are coming forward and bringing
these problems up to the
surface and encouraging people
to explore them.
Thanks for being with me.
>> Thank you.
>> And thank you
for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]